.. _ptimer:

====================
PTIMER: Timer engine
====================

.. contents::


Introduction
============

PTIMER is a small functional unit used to measure time by the card. It has
a 56-bit tick counter connected to a programmable clock source. The current
value of this counter is used for timestamping by many other units on the GPU.
Two such timestamps can be substracted to get the wall time elapsed between
their creation and measure eg. command execution time. Also, it's possible to
set up an interrupt that will be triggered when the low 27 bits of the counter
reach a specified value.

The PTIMER's MMIO range is 0x101000:0x102000 on NV01, 0x9000:0xa000 on NV03
and later cards. It is enabled by PMC.ENABLE bit 4 [NV01 - shared with PDMA]
or 16 [NV03-], and its interrupt line is connected to PMC.INTR line 20. It's
available on all cards.

Curiously, on NV41+ the PTIMER is also used to report MMIO faults, ie. MMIO
space accesses from host that failed for some reason.

.. todo:: document that some day].


.. _ptimer-mmio-nv01:

MMIO register list - NV01
=========================

======== ========= =============
Address  Name      Description
======== ========= =============
0x101100 INTR      :ref:`interrupt status / acknowledge <ptimer-mmio-intr>`
0x101140 INTR_EN   :ref:`interrupt enable <ptimer-mmio-intr>`
0x101200 CLOCK_DIV :ref:`clock divider <ptimer-mmio-clock-ratio>`
0x101210 CLOCK_MUL :ref:`clock multiplier <ptimer-mmio-clock-ratio>`
0x101400 TIME_LOW  :ref:`low part of the time counter <ptimer-mmio-time>`
0x101404 TIME_HIGH :ref:`high part of the time counter <ptimer-mmio-time>`
0x101410 ALARM     :ref:`the TIME_LOW value to interrupt on <ptimer-mmio-alarm>`
======== ========= =============


.. _ptimer-mmio-nv03:

MMIO register list - NV03-
==========================

======== ========= =============== =============
Address  Variants  Name            Description
======== ========= =============== =============
0x009060 NV50-     ???             ???
0x009064 NV50-     ???             ???
0x009080 NV17:NV20 ???             ???
         NV25:NV50               
0x009080 NVC0-     ???             ???
0x009084 NV41-     MMIO_FAULT_ADDR address and type of last MMIO fault
0x009088 NV41-     MMIO_FAULT_DATA data written on last MMIO fault
0x009100 all       INTR            :ref:`interrupt status / acknowledge <ptimer-mmio-intr>`
0x009140 all       INTR_EN         :ref:`interrupt enable <ptimer-mmio-intr>`
0x009200 all       CLOCK_DIV       :ref:`clock divider <ptimer-mmio-clock-ratio>`
0x009210 all       CLOCK_MUL       :ref:`clock multiplier <ptimer-mmio-clock-ratio>`
0x009220 NV41-     CLOCK_SOURCE    :ref:`clock source selection <ptimer-mmio-clock-source>`
0x009400 all       TIME_LOW        :ref:`low part of the time counter <ptimer-mmio-time>`
0x009410 all       TIME_HIGH       :ref:`high part of the time counter <ptimer-mmio-time>`
0x009420 all       ALARM           :ref:`the TIME_LOW value to interrupt on <ptimer-mmio-alarm>`
======== ========= =============== =============

.. todo:: figure out 9060-9080
.. todo:: document MMIO_FAULT_*


.. _ptimer-mmio-clock-source:

The clock source
================

The clock that PTIMER counts is generated by applying a selectable ratio to
a clock source. The clock source depends on the card:

- NV01:NV04: the clock source is the MPLL output [see display/nv03/pramdac.txt]
- NV04:NV40: the clock source is the NVPLL output [see display/nv03/pramdac.txt]
- NV40:NV41: the clock source is HCLK, the host clock [see pm/nv40-pclock.txt]
- NV41:NV84: the clock source can be bound to either the internal clock source
  or external clock source. Internal clock source is the crystal
  [see io/pstraps.txt] frequency multiplied by a small ratio, while external
  clock source is HCLK, the host clock [see pm/nv40-pclock.txt, pm/nv50-pclock.txt].
- NV84 and up: like NV41, but external clock source is TCLK, the PTIMER clock
  [see pm/nv50-pclock.txt, pm/nva3-pclock.txt, pm/nvc0-pclock.txt]

On NV41+ cards, which have both internal and external clock generators, the
internal clock generator and the switch is configured by the CLOCK_SOURCE
register:

MMIO 0x009220: CLOCK_SOURCE [NV41-]
  - bits 0-7: INTERNAL_MUL - specifies the multiplier of internal clock
    generator minus 1
  - bits 8-11: INTERNAL_DIV - specifies the divisor of internal clock
    generator minus 1
  - bit 16: SELECT - if 0, internal clock source used, if 1 external source
    used

The internal clock generator will generate a clock with frequency given by
crystal_frequency * (MUL + 1) / (DIV + 1). However, it is not
a PLL, but a simple counter - it cannot generate a clock of a higher frequency
than what PTIMER logic itself is clocked at, which is equal to the external
clock.


.. _ptimer-mmio-clock-ratio:

The clock ratio
===============

The clock source is frequency-converted by a simple counter-based converter
before being used for counting. The converter multiplies the frequency by
the specified ratio. The registers are:

MMIO 0x101200: CLOCK_DIV [NV01:NV03]
MMIO 0x009200: CLOCK_DIV [NV03-]
  - bits 0-15: clock divider - should not be 0

MMIO 0x101210: CLOCK_MUL [NV01:NV03]
MMIO 0x009210: CLOCK_MUL [NV03-]
  - bits 0-15: clock multiplier - has to be between 0 and the clock divider,
    0 stops the counter entirely

The clock used for the counter is clock_source * CLOCK_MUL / CLOCK_DIV. It's
not possible to get a higher frequency than the clock source - the converter
will misbehave.


.. _ptimer-mmio-time:
.. _ptimer-perf-time-b12:

The time counter
================

PTIMER's clock is a 56-bit value that is spread across two 32-bit registers:

MMIO 0x101400: TIME_LOW [NV01:NV03]
MMIO 0x009400: TIME_LOW [NV03-]
  - bits 5-31: low 27 bits of the counter
  - bits 0-4: always 0

MMIO 0x101404: TIME_HIGH [NV01:NV03]
MMIO 0x009410: TIME_HIGH [NV03-]
  - bits 0-28: high 29 bits of the counter
  - bits 29-31: always 0

The counter is thus embedded in bits 5-60 of a 64-bit number split across the
two 32-bit words. Whenever the PTIMER clock is requested by other parts of the
card, the returned timestamp will be this 64-bit number. Because of the 5-bit
shift, the timestamps are actually counted in units of 1/32 of PTIMER tick,
with resolution of 32 ticks.

Also, TIME_LOW bit 17 [ie. bit 12 of the actual counter] is connected to
a PCOUNTER signal on NV10:NVC0, called PTIMER_TIME_B12.


Reading the clock
-----------------

In order to accurately read the clock, the following code should be used::

	uint32 high1, high2, low;

	do
	{
		high1 = mmio_rd32(TIME_HIGH);
		low = mmio_rd32(TIME_LOW);
		high2 = mmio_rd32(TIME_HIGH);
	} while (high1 != high2);

This code works around the "mutual dependency". No matter in what order the
registers are read, an issue may arise and lead to an error of 2^32 as show by
the following examples:

- TIME_LOW is read, overflows and then TIME_HIGH is read
- TIME_HIGH is read, TIME_LOW overflows, TIME_LOW is read

The proposed code checks no overflow on TIME_LOW happened between the moment we
read TIME_HIGH and the moment we read TIME_HIGH again. If it happened, we start
again until it succeeds.


.. _ptimer-intr:
.. _ptimer-mmio-intr:
.. _ptimer-mmio-alarm:

The alarm and interrupts
========================

PTIMER can also be used to trigger an interrupt when TIME_LOW matches
a specified value. The registers dealing with interrupts are:

MMIO 0x101100: INTR [NV01:NV03]
MMIO 0x009100: INTR [NV03-]
  Status of interrupts generated by PTIMER. On read, returns 1 for bits
  corresponding to pending interrupts. On write, if 1 is written to a bit,
  its interrupt gets cleared, if 0 is written nothing happens.

MMIO 0x101140: INTR_EN [NV01:NV03]
MMIO 0x009140: INTR_EN [NV03-]
  Interrupt enable bitmask. Set to enable, clear to disable. Interrupts that
  are masked will still show up in INTR when they're triggered, but won't
  cause the PTIMER interrupt line to go active.

The bitfields common to these registers are:

- bit 0: ALARM - triggered whenever value of ALARM register is equal to value
  of TIME_LOW register

The alarm time is set in:

MMIO 0x101410: ALARM [NV01:NV03]
MMIO 0x009420: ALARM [NV03-]
  - bits 5-31: alarm time - when this equals the value of bits 5-31 of TIME_LOW,
    the ALARM interrupt will be triggered
  - bits 0-4: always 0
